# What is Typetta?

Typetta is an **open-source ORM** that can be used with Node JS, Browser, Cordova, PhoneGap, Ionic, React Native, NativeScript, Expo and Electron projects. It's 100% written in TypeScript and aims to allow a seamless access to data in a typed fashion to all **main SQL databases** (MySQL, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, SQLLite3, CockroachDB, MariaDB, Oracle e Amazon Redshift) and also to the NoSQL database **MongoDB**.

Typetta is pluggable into any TypeScript backend (including serverless applications and microservices) but in terms of gain we totally suggest using it in all **GraphQL** backends, because... because we simply love GraphQL.

  - [How to use Typetta?](#how-to-use-typetta)
  - [Main Functionalities](#main-functionalities)
  - [Why Typetta?](#why-typetta)
  
## How to use Typetta?
With Typetta everything spins around the *applicative model*, the entities that describe the applicative domain and all underlying relations between them. This model is described in standard GraphQL, using all basic concepts (scalars, types, enumerations, etc...) and some custom directives.

Starting from the model output of the analysis of the domain, Typetta provides a range of code generators for:

- Types definitions in TypeScript language for each entity in the model.

- Data Access Object (aka DAO) for each entity type that has a correspondent data source. Each DAO is an object that the developer query also with advanced CRUD operations.

- A DAOContext, a contextual object where the developer can configure each data source and retrieve the reference of any DAO.

## Main Functionalities

Here below is a short link of what makes Typetta awesome:

- A complete support of main SQL databases and also MongoDB.
- Multi database, included ability to cross query different databases.
- Multiple connections and connection pooling.
- Entity relations: 1-1, 1-n, n-m.
- Dynamic typing and corresponding data projections.
- Pagination.
- Can be extended using middlewares.
- Customized scalars and serialization on the database.
- Autogenerated IDs
- Validation rules.
- Virtual, computed and calculated fields.
- Aggregation queries.
- Ability to build custom queries.
- Define data access security policies.
- Embedded documents supported on MongoDB as well as on SQL.
- Automated code generation.
- Effortless integration with GraphQL backends.
- Transactions.
- Logging.

## Why Typetta?

Typetta fulfills the need of having a typed ORM connected to SQL and NoSQL databases with **productivity** and **flexibility** in mind.

The philosophy behind Typetta components has been to ensure ease of use and optimization of development time, adding complexity (with direct access to dara source) only when strictly needed.

In case you are still in doubt, why use Typetta instead of other ORMs?

- It's the ONLY TypeScript ORM that has a full support for **SQL and MongoDB databases**.
  
- A very **strict typing** system that 100% leverages TypeScript in providing types as reposes bases on the data type requested.

- Using standard **GraphQL** you can define the model. Using this standard opens the door  to a whole set of instruments and third party frameworks that are based on this standard.
